Welcome to Cinema Summary ladies and gentlemen,
and let me tell you: Siblings are a pain in
the butt but they are family and
sometimes they will be all that's
left for you in this world.
Now just so you know, this video will be split
into 2 sections: a summary and an explanation
section that will focus on things like autism
about the legality of counting cards,
as well as the man who the titular
Rain Man is based upon
If you’ve already seen the movie
and you're interested in those facts
you can skip to this time code onscreen now
but if you haven't already or just want a quick recap:
This is Rain Man
In the City of Angels, one Charlie Babbitt
is busy at work: he’s a douche-y looking
yuppie who has a business selling
luxury cars to clients.
But things have turned for the worse as the
most recent Lamborghini’s he’s planning
on selling have been held up as they failed
to meet the EPA’s emission regulations which
sucks as he really needs to sell these cars
to their buyers so that he can pay back the
loan he took out to buy the cars.
So, he tries to keep his buyers interested
and get an extension on his loan.
He works with Lenny and Susanna, his girlfriend
who he takes to go to Palm Springs though
on their way there he gets a call from his
dad’s lawyer, who tells him
his father, Sanford Babbitt, has passed away.
He heads to Cincinnati with Susanna to attend
the funeral and we learn that at a young age,
Charlie’s mother died leaving him alone
with his very distant dad, they had a falling
out and since then Charlie has cut himself
off from his dad.
But he’s willing to go to the funeral and
head back to his old stomping ground.
The house is empty and lifeless but in the
garage is a beautiful old car full of memories,
it’s a 1949 Buick Roadster Convertible.
An absolute gorgeous piece of machinery that
had been a source of contention between Charlie
and his dad who never let him drive the car
and the one time that Charlie snuck out and
took it for a joy ride with a few of his buddies:
it led to him getting booked at the police
station where his dad left him there for 2 days.
Yeesh.
Thankfully since his dad’s dead, Charlie
is going to get his inheritance which amounts
to a couple of fancy rose bushes and the Buick
Convertible with the $3 million-dollar
estate going to an unnamed trustee.
But with a little bit of digging, Charlie is able
to figure out that the trustee is
at the Wallbrook Institute, a mental hospital
that caters towards people with special needs.
While he’s there, he encounters
a peculiar man who recognizes the car Charlie
drives as the strange man’s dad let him
drive the Buick when he was younger.
Who’s your dad?
Sanford Babbit.
And your mother?
Eleanore Babbit.
Charlie finds out from Dr. Bruner, that the
strange man in question is: Raymond Babbit,
his biological, blood brother who is a high
functioning autistic.
A condition that makes him quirky, being very
focused on following routines, keeping things
exactly where they are, and quoting Abbot
and Costello under his breath to calm himself
down.
So, as a loving brother trying to “get to
know” his newfound brother, Charlie takes
Raymond out of Wallbrook and together with
Susanna head to LA.
On their way there, they stop and stay at
a motel for the night which gets awkward as
they try to deal with Raymond’s eccentricities
which leads to an argument breaking out between
Susanna and Charlie about Charlie exploiting
his brother for his $3 million dollars and
Susanna leaves Charlie.
The next day, the brothers have breakfast
at a diner where Charlie gets on the phone
with Dr. Bruner who insists on Raymond’s
return to Wallbrook.
While Raymond is trying to get some toothpicks
from a waitress, she drops the box of toothpicks
spilling them on the floor and Raymond is
able to count every single spilled toothpick
in the blink of an eye.
Something that Charlie takes note of but doesn’t
think about.
As they continue on their journey, things
are getting worse for Charlie: whose loans
are pass due and the cars he’s trying to
sell are still locked up.
So, he tries to catch a flight to LA but Raymond
refuses to get on any of the planes and freaks
out when Charlie tries to drag him to the
terminal so they drive there and while on
the interstate highway system, a motor accident
occurs and Raymond becomes deeply concerned
with the danger of the road.
So, they have to get off the highway and continue
their journey, taking up even more time on
what was supposed to be a 3-day drive to LA.
However, after staying at a motel, they’re
held up by the rain which Raymond doesn’t
like so Charlie begins making calls to try
to get an extension on the loan for his company.
However, while making some calls, he discovers
that Dr. Bruner never ‘established a conservatorship
of Raymond’, therefore there’s a high
chance that Charlie can get custody of Raymond
and of course the $3 million.
They continue driving until they hit a town
where Charlie takes Raymond to see a psychiatrist
who although can’t help Charlie too much does
test Raymond on his ability to calculate numbers
"Do you know how much the square root of 2130 is?"
"46.15192304"
demonstrates an immense talent for number crunching
From there, they have frequent stops, phone
calls concerning the state of the loans and
Charlie’s business, and stopping at motels
for the night.
Though at one motel, Charlie learns more about
his brother and finds out that Raymond was
or is Rain Man, his imaginary friend from
childhood who was taken to Wallbrook after
accidentally spilling hot water on Charlie
when he was a baby.
Their father having thought
Raymond intentionally hurt Charlie,
and kept Raymond at Wallbrook for his own sake.
The following day, things get worse as Charlie
finds out that the cars he was trying to sell
were repossessed to pay off the late loans
and the buyers for the cars want their money
back now which totals to about $80,000 dollars.
Money that Charlie doesn’t have.
He’s screwed.
They continue driving, passing through the Vegas Strip,
and while at a diner Charlie has a eureka moment
and discovers that Raymond’s impeccable
memory makes him perfect for counting cards
So, they rush back to Vegas (after pawning
off Charlie’s watch for some cash), sprucing
Raymond up and buying some new duds, they
hit the Blackjack tables.
Time after time getting winning hands, again
and again.
Which gets the attention of the Casino security
who try to figure out how exactly they are
cheating.
After cashing out and many other things like
Raymond getting the attention of a foxy vixen
by the name of Iris, getting taught how to
dance by Charlie, as well as Susanna’s return
to Charlie.
Charlie is taken to meet with Mr. Kelso, the
head of casino security who tells him to take
his brother, leave Vegas with their winnings,
and never come back.
A generous offer that Charlie takes.
After leaving Vegas, and dropping Susanna
off at her apartment, the Babbitt Brothers
head to Charlie’s home in LA where Charlie
meets with Dr. Bruner and they have a talk
about Charlie’s scheme to get the 3 million
from Raymond via a custody battle.
Not that it’ll matter as Bruner doesn’t
have to hand over any amount of the money
from the trust to Charlie if he even can win
custody and offers a cheque of 250,000 dollars
to Charlie who rejects it because now it isn’t
about the money.
Now it’s about why the hell no one ever
told him that he had a brother.
Something that Bruner can’t answer.
The next morning, Raymond tries to make pancakes
but accidentally sets off the smoke alarm
the beeping from the alarm causes him to freak out and
he only calms down after Charlie breaks the alarm.
After breakfast, the Babbitts go to Raymond’s
custody hearing which ends with Charlie losing
custody of Raymond as due to his condition,
Raymond cannot make any decisions of his own
and he cannot live safely or freely in the
world outside of Wallbrook.
But even with this sour taste in Charlie’s
mouth, there’s a sweetness to this hearing:
he’s gotten to know his brother and learned
to love him even with his quirks and after
the hearing, they go to the Amtrak and say
their goodbyes with Charlie giving Raymond
a backpack full of all the things Raymond
likes including a copy of Abbot & Costello’s
Who’s On First.
And as Raymond goes to his seat, Charlie looks on:
although he lost custody and his business is sunk
At least he got to know his brother and is
able to visit him when he wants to.
Alright, so.
The talking points of this section will be
about with autism, it’s depiction in
the film, as well as the legality of counting cards,
and the man who inspired Raymond Babbitt
Now, autism is a real-world condition that is formally
known as “autism spectrum disorder” which
As depicted in the film, a few quirks of autistic
individuals are delayed response, avoidance
of eye contact, and impaired social skills
along with emotional outbursts, repetition
of words or phrases, abusing themselves, and
an unusual tone of voice.
All of which are demonstrated by Dustin Hoffman’s
impressive performance as Raymond Babbit,
Now individuals with autism are often described
as being low functioning or high functioning
which based on my research is not a “clinical
term”, it’s more or less colloquial
Now it's mentioned in the film that Raymond
is a case of a high functioning autistic who
This is mentioned by the psychiatrist that Raymond and Charlie visit
that is to say that he's able to live in society, relatively undisturbed albeit needing some support
of which Charlie is only able to provide some of
Which brings me to the topic concerning savants
of which Raymond is one of.
Now savants are individuals with special needs or certain impairments
who demonstrate an immense talent in a particular
field, immense knowledge of a particular subject,
or even a creative skill that seems out of
place with their disability.
Now, according to my research not every autist
can or will be a savant and even then, autists
can have natural talents towards something
and they don’t have to be autistic in order
to be a savant.
Furthermore, autistic savants themselves don’t
have to be gifted in mental mathematics although
usually they do demonstrate great memory like
Raymond.
A fascinating example of such a person is
Mary Temple Grandin,
or Temple Grandin" as she's usually
known a who is a very visual thinker
with photographic memory: able to memorize a lot
of information and freely manipulate it in her mind.
Although the memorization of things whether
numbers, facts, entire books, or even cards
can be more specific from person to person.
Now something that Charlie
mentions is that card counting is illegal
which based on my research is not true
although casino authorities do frown upon it
Now in case you didn’t know Card Counting is a strategy employed by gamblers for Blackjack,
to maximize wins and minimize losses
It revolves around a system of ‘valuing’
cards by how much of an advantage they give
the player, betting high when the player has
an advantage and betting low when they don’t.
Calculating the values of each player’s
hands on the fly while taking into account
the number of decks remaining which for Raymond
is easy to remember, the value easy to calculate,
and in turn predicting what cards will turn
up next is child’s play for him.
Now with that said, mentally counting cards
is NOT illegal since it doesn’t affect the
outcome of the deal and it is a skill.
An intellectual ability whereas using a machine
or electronic device to count the cards is
very much illegal which does make it a little
strange that Charlie and Raymond were
kicked out of the casino if they didn’t utilize such means to win but they were unfair to the casino and
one way or another, casino's don't like that one bit
and as the old saying goes
The House always wins.
So, unless your Raymond yourself, I would
suggest you stay away from casinos
Which finally brings me to the man who
inspired Raymond Babbitt: Kim Peek
Kim Peek, who was not an autist but was a savant due to an abnormality in his brain
that led to his two hemispheres being disconnected
but that didn't stop him from being a walking, talking encyclopedia. You see, because of this abnormality
in his brain, he had impeccable memory, was able to read incredibly quickly due to his ability to read
2 pages with both eyes, and also had an immense talent for being able to calculate what days of the wee
a random date would be. Now how he ended up being the inspiration for Raymond is interesting
Barry Morrow, the screenwriter for Rain man, met Peek in 1984, in Arlington, Texas at a meeting for the
Association of Retarded Citizens, as Peek's dad was a chairman in a committee and before Morrow had written
for a few TV movies about a 'retarded man named Bill'. Now supposedly they had a chat and Peek showed off
his amazing memory to Morrow and screenwriter was inspired to write a character based on Peek
and that's how Raymond was born and the critical success of Rain Man led to Peek gaining celebrity status
and began touring around the country where he would advocate for the increased tolerance of the disabled
It’s strange to think that when he was a child, doctors said he wouldn’t be able to read walk, or talk
but by the time he died at the age of 58, he would’ve walked more than a thousand steps, would’ve talked
more than a thousand words, and would’ve memorized more than a thousand facts
Kim Peek was an amazing person who led an extraordinary life,
who in a way led to a resurgence in interest and knowledge amongst the general populace
about autism and savants with that said, thank you so much for watching ladies and gentlemen
if you enjoyed it leave a like down below and subscribe to get updated on my latest uploads